@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@dfn{Galactic Crisis} is a game of politics in a galactic
setting, played in a bipolar universe where two galactic
superpowers with incompatible political structures are
forced into an uneasy peace.

The invention of a terrifying bomb, capable of destroying
entire suns and imbalancing the gravitic structure of the
galaxy, prevents complete peace --- but also prevents
total war.

The two superpowers must tread carefully.  They cannot
engage directly in combat with each other, for that risks
the destruction of the galaxy.  But other, minor powers
--- interplanetary nations, empires, coalitions, and the
like --- can serve as pawns to hide the mastermind's
hand.

@menu
* A.P.D. ::                        The main technological achievement.
* Galactic Politics ::             The two superpowers.
@end menu

@node A.P.D.
@section A.P.D.
@cindex A.P.D.

(the below is an excerpt from the book
``A@.P@.D@.: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Prefer
Galactic Crises'')

@quotation
A@.P@.D@. --- the name, rightly, evokes
terror in most readers.  The A@.P@.D@. bomb
--- or Antimatter-Probability Drive bomb --- is a
remotely-controllable bomb capable of
triggering a nova in any star in the galaxy.

At the core of this terrifying device is a small amount of
antimatter suspended in a probability drive.
A probability drive
can exchange --- with a large but not absolutely certain
probability --- its contents with a similarly-sized volume
in space, in a single quantum of time.  Swap a cubic meter
of a star's core material with mostly empty space and a few
grams of antimatter, and the resulting energy released by
the antimatter-matter annihilation can trigger the star
into nova.

Create several thousands of such bombs,
targeted at your opponent's stars, to make your presence
in the galactic stage credible.
Scatter them in deep space, to make it next-to-impossible
to find and destroy them.
Program them to trigger if a
particular signal does not reach them, and you ensure
that not even a first strike will be capable of reducing
your retaliatory capability.

Neutrality in the galactic stage is not an
option.  Even if your stars are not targeted by another
country's stockpile of A@.P@.D@.'s --- something you
can never be certain of --- their existence in large
quantities has side effects.  Novae are, in the grand
scheme of things, commonplace events.  But several
thousand novae occurring at the same time is not a
common event; the best scientists can only speculate
on what would happen, but most predict a complete
disaster.

Interestingly, there is only one other major application
for probability drives.  It is not starship travel.
The risk of a probability drive failure is
significant enough to deter all but the most desperate
or reckless of passengers.
Instead, this other major
application is the transmission
of messages.  Transmit a simple radio transmitter
sending a particular message via probability drive, and
the occassional failure to transmit will simply be a
minor operating cost.

The two superpowers communicate almost solely by this
method; many other commentators have observed the
apparent irony in that the probability drive makes
possible the complete annihilation of the galaxy,
while at the same time allowing both superpowers to
convince each other not to do so.

I do not share this observation.  There is no irony in
the second major application of the probability drive.

Instead, I will show, in this book, that the weapon
known as the A@.P@.D@. bomb is not a tool of war,
but a tool of
peace.
@end quotation

@node Galactic Politics
@section Galactic Politics
@cindex Galactic Politics
@cindex Politics, Galactic

(the below is an excerpt from the book
``The Rise and Plateau of Superpower'')

@quotation
There are many possible scenarios for how galactic
politics could have played out.  For simplicity,
we show
here the simplest cases: the singleton, the bipolar,
and the three-way multipolar, with particular
emphasis on the
bipolar scenario.  They are, respectively, the
cases where one, two, or three cultures or species
reach the level of galactic superpower.

Ideally, a singleton of a sane, rational culture
should arise.  But singletons run a unique risk:
all the eggs, metaphorically, are in one basket.
Even if a culture succeeeds at a major galactic
power
level, it may not necessarily scale up to the
galactic superpower level.  And if that single
culture collapses, we then drop down to one of
the other cases.  A worse scenario is a
singleton able to sustain itself --- by
essentially enslaving or consuming most of its
sentient population.

A less ideal scenario is a three-way multipolar
galactic political structure.  This way, even if one
of the superpowers ends up consuming its own citizens
to sustain itself, only about a third of the galaxy
is condemned to live in such a hellhole.  A three-way
multipolar structure is also quite stable.  Consider
the case where two superpowers ally to destroy the
third.  Such an allegiance cannot be a real one;
later we show the possible Everett probability-paths
in the Tegmark universe, but for now, consider: if
one of the allies cooperates and commits its power
fully to the eradication of the enemy, the other
may decide to hang back and opportunistically
betray its ally later on.  Neither can one superpower
decide to eliminate one of the others while hoping
for the third to stay neutral; even if it wins, it
would be in a weakened state, leaving it vulnerable
to the neutral superpower.

In both the singleton and three-way cases, military
spending need only be the
essential minimum: enough to keep its citizens safe
from each other, without having to worry about some
other superpower's military.

The least ideal scenario, unfortunately, is exactly
what we have: two superpowers opposing each other.
Each superpower perceives victory to be just one
enemy away.  Each one seeks to overpower its
opponent, fully aware that the other also seeks to
do so.  It is a recipe for disaster, since each
must continually spend on military
and espionage just to maintain equality with the
other, reducing
spending on investments or keeping the populace
happy.  Each is forced, because of the enormous
military might of the other, to use indirect means
of gaining power.

Such indirect means force ``neutral'' minor powers
to become pawns, as each superpower jostles for
more effective control over the galaxy.  Each
minor power eventually decides that openly allying
with one or the other serves its interests more,
since allegiance implies that its allied superpower
will be willing to use its tremendous military
might to protect it from the other superpower's
terrifying military superiority.

Into this setting is dropped the technology of
the A@.P@.D@. bomb and the probability drive
message drop.  The former magnifies overt
military power; the latter, covert espionage
power.  Both serve to @emph{reduce} the options
available to the superpowers, virtually requiring
both superpowers to step lightly in conflicts
with each other.

As fewer options remain for each superpower's
advancement, each one becomes more static: they
reach a power plateau where they cannot advance
further.  The horrible consequence of the
bipolar galaxy is that this power plateau is
maintained by ever-increasing military and
espionage spending, as well as requiring
ever-increasing diplomatic finesse.
@end quotation
